Internetworking Models
When networks first came into being, computers could typically communicate
only with computers from the same manufacturer. For example,
companies ran either a complete DECnet solution or an IBM solution—not
both together. In the late 1970s, the OSI (Open Systems Interconnection)
model was created by the International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) to break this barrier. The OSI model was meant to help vendors create
interoperable network devices. Like world peace, it’ll probably never happen
completely, but it’s still a great goal.
The OSI model is the primary architectural model for networks. It
describes how data and network information are communicated from applications
on one computer, through the network media, to an application
on another computer. The OSI reference model breaks this approach into
layers.
Cisco has also created a three-layer model that is used to help design,
implement, and maintain any size network. By understanding the three-layer
model, you will gain an understanding of how Cisco views internetworking.
Also, by having a fundamental understanding of the devices used at each
layer of the model, you can effectively design and purchase the correct Cisco
equipment to meet your business needs. This chapter will cover both the OSI
model and the Cisco three-layer hierarchical model.
The Layered Approach
A reference model is a conceptual blueprint of how communications should
take place. It addresses all the processes required for effective communication
and divides these processes into logical groupings called layers. When a
communication system is designed in this manner, it’s known as layered
architecture.
Think of it like this: You and some friends want to start a company. One
of the first things you’d do is sit down and think through what must be done,
who will do them, what order they will be done in, and how they relate to
each other. Ultimately, you might group these tasks into departments. Let’s
say you decide to have an order-taking department, an inventory department,
and a shipping department. Each of your departments has its own
unique tasks, keeping its staff members busy and requiring them to focus on
only their own duties. 
4 Chapter 1  Internetworking
In this scenario, departments are a metaphor for the layers in a communication
system. For things to run smoothly, the staff of each department will
have to both trust and rely heavily on the others to do their jobs and competently
handle their unique responsibilities. In your planning sessions, you
would probably take notes, recording the entire process to facilitate later discussions
about standards of operation that will serve as your business blueprint,
or reference model.
Once your business is launched, your department heads, armed with the
part of the blueprint relating to their department, will need to develop practical
methods to implement their assigned tasks. These practical methods, or
protocols, will need to be compiled into a standard operating procedures
manual and followed closely. Each of the various procedures in your manual
will have been included for different reasons and have varying degrees of
importance and implementation. If you form a partnership or acquire
another company, it will be imperative for its business protocols—its business
blueprint—to match, or be compatible with, yours.
Similarly, software developers can use a reference model to understand
computer communication processes and to see what types of functions need
to be accomplished on any one layer. If they are developing a protocol for a
certain layer, all they need to concern themselves with is the specific layer’s
functions, not those of any other layer. Another layer and protocol will handle
the other functions. The technical term for this idea is binding. The communication
processes that are related to each other are bound, or grouped
together, at a particular layer.Advantages of Reference Models
The OSI model, like the Cisco three-layer model you will learn about later,
is hierarchical, and the same benefits and advantages can apply to any layered
model. The primary purpose of all models, and especially the OSI
model, is to allow different vendors to interoperate. The benefits of the OSI
and Cisco models include, but are not limited to, the following:
 Dividing the complex network operation into more manageable layers
 Changing one layer without having to change all layers. This allows
application developers to specialize in design and development.
 Defining the standard interface for the “plug-and-play” multivendor
integration